In this lesson, you're going to learn how
to log into a Linux system, and we'll
talk a little bit about SSH, what that is,
and what SSH clients you need to use.
If you have Linux installed on hardware
that you have physical access to, or
you have Linux installed in virtual
hardware, like a virtual machine
running in VirtualBox, then you can
connect directly to the Linux server.
In this example, we'll be looking at
Linux running in a virtual machine.
In VirtualBox you can highlight
your Linux virtual machine and
click the green button to start it up.
We'll give it a few seconds here to boot.
Each Linux login screen
will be a little different.
In this case, you're given
a list of users to choose from.
And when you click on that user, you can
enter in the password for that user and
click the log in button.
I'm going to select Jason,
type my password.
I could either hit Enter here or
click on the Log In button.
That's all there is to it.
Just enter your user name and password.
In this example, your given a graphical
user interface, the Linux desktop.
In order to interact
with the command line,
you need to start the terminal
emulator application.
In CentOS, this is located in the
Applications and then Systems Tools menu.
There you see Terminal.
Just click on it.
And the next lesson will start
interacting with the command line.
For now, you just need to know where
the terminal application is so
you can start it, and
to exit it you simply type Exit.
To log out of CentOS,
go to the System menu and Log Out.
On some Linux systems,
you'll be prompted for a username.
In this case,
you have to type in your username.
I'm going to log in as Jason, so
I'll type Jason and I can either
hit Log In or hit the Enter button.
Then I'll type in my password.
Let's see what it's like to log
into an Ubuntu Linux system.
We'll highlight the Virtual Machine, and
instead of clicking the green arrow this
time we can right-click and click Start.
Sometimes these are configured
to auto login so
you may not even have to enter
a user name and password in.
You'll just be given the desktop.
In this case you see a menu, again with
a list of users that you can select and
then enter the password for that user.
Hit Enter to login.
I'm going to select
the VirtualBoxImages.com user, and
that username is actually adminuser,
and the password is adminuser.
What is displayed in the menu is
the description of the account.
You can see that the Ubuntu
desktop is different than CentOS.
Again, each Linux distribution is
gonna look slightly different and
function slightly differently.
Gonna exit out of the web browser here.
You see a list of applications on
the left hand side of your screen.
You can click on one of those to start it.
If you don't find what you're looking for,
you can click on the button in the top
left, and type in a search term.
In this case we're looking for
the terminal application, so
type in terminal and
click on the terminal.
And there we are at the command line.
And again, to exit the terminal
application just type in the word exit.
I this desktop environment, to log out or
shut down, go to the top right hand
corner and click the gear icon.
I'm going to choose Shut Down, and when
prompted I'll click on Shut Down again.
Sometimes you'll be presented with a text
prompt to log in instead of a graphical
user interface.
Again, just type in your username and
password.
If you installed a server distribution
instead of a desktop distribution,
this is the type of log in prompt
that you would expect to see.
Again to exit, just type the word exit.
I'll log in as the adminuser,
with the password of adminuser.
If you are going to connect to
a Linux system over the network,
more than likely you are going to use SSH.
SSH stands for Secure Shell.
SSH is a network protocol.
Its primary purpose is
to allow you to connect
from one system to another
system securely over a network.
In the past, you would use Telnet.
SSH has replaced Telnet as
its more secure counterpart.
Telnet is practically obsolete today, but
you may encounter it if you have
to connect to a legacy system.
We've already touched on terminal
emulators a couple of times in this
course already.
In order to connect to
Linux over the network,
we're going to need a terminal emulator
that also acts as an SSH client.
For Windows,
the most popular SSH client and
terminal emulator is
a program called PuTTY.
To get PuTTY, you can open up a web
browser and type in P-U-T-T-Y.
The first result in Google
is the download page.
And you only need PUTTY.exe at this point.
I'm going to save the file.
Now I'm going to open the file and
run the program In the host name or
IP address box, I'm going to type in
the network name of my Linux server.
In this example,
I'm using L-I-N-U-X-S-V-R.
Whoever created your account on the Linux
server will be able to give you
the details of either the host name or
the IP address to use.
This could be a server at work.
It could be a shared host account.
So maybe you're SSHing into your
bluehost.com or hostgator.com SSH account.
Leave the default port at 22
unless you are specifically given
another port to use.
Click Open to start the connection.
The first time you connect to a server,
you'll get a security alert.
And you can simply just click yes on this.
This will only happen the first
time you log in to a server.
Now you can enter your username and
password to log in.
Type exit when you are done.
PuTTY has many features and options.
One of the things you can do is
specify your username in PuTTY
before you try to connect.
On the right hand side, click on Data and
then fill in the auto Log in field.
I'm going to save this as a session so
that I can quickly log in to
this server again in the future.
I'll give it a name and
click the Save button.
Then when I double-click it,
it will start a connection to that server.
You'll see that PuTTY has already provided
the Linux server our username, and
now all we have to do
is enter our password.
I'm going to highlight my saved session,
click Load, and change the font.
Go to the left hand side.
Click on Appearance under Window.
And then I'll change the font.
Make it nice and large so we can see.
You may have been given a IP address for
your server.
So if you don't have a name, but
an IP, you can use that as well.
Again, the first time you log in to
a server or particular IP address,
it will ask you to confirm the postkey.
Just click yes.
Again, PuTTY knows our username
because we've specified it, and
now we simply enter in our password.
In order to connect to
a Linux system from Mac,
you need to start
the terminal application.
This is located in
the Applications folder, and
there's a sub-folder in
there called Utilities.
You'll find terminal.app
in that directory.
Once the terminal application has started,
you can use the SSH command
to initiate a connection.
Commands are case sensitive, so
be sure to use lower case SSH.
In this example, my username on
my Mac desktop is Jason, and
on the Linux server it is also Jason.
So I'm just going to type ssh linuxsvr.
Again, just like in Windows you'll
be prompted about the host key.
And you only have to accept this
the first time you connect.
So, I'll type in yes.
And then I'll be connected
to the Linux host.
To exit, type exit.
If you want to or need to connect to the
remote system using a different user name,
you type in ssh space,
that user name, the @ symbol,
which is Shift 2, and
the name of the Linux server.
In this case I'm going to user adminuser,
and adminuser is the password.
Now we're logged into the Linux system and
I'll type exit to get back.
If you are using Linux at work,
you might connect to a server
that ends in .yourcompanyname.com.
Again, just use the host name or
IP address that you were given to use.
You'll see that connecting to
an IP address works as well.
To recap, if you have physical
access to a Linux system, or
if that Linux system is running in
a virtual machine, as in VirtualBox,
then you can log into it directly.
Sometimes you'll be presented with
a graphical interface to log into.
Sometimes it'll be just a textual prompt.
If you're going to log in to
a Linux system over the network,
you're going to use SSH.
For Windows users, I recommend
using PuTTY as your SSH client.
For Mac users, use the built-in terminal
application and a command line SSH client.